--- Page 1 ---

sensors
Article
An SDN-Based Solution for Horizontal Auto-Scaling and Load
Balancing of Transparent VNF Clusters
Alejandro Llorens-Carrodeguas 1,*
 , Irian Leyva-Pupo 1,*
 , Cristina Cervelló-Pastor 1,*
 and Luis Piñeiro 2
and Shuaib Siddiqui 3
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Llorens-Carrodeguas, A.;
Leyva-Pupo, I.; Cervelló-Pastor, C.;
Piñeiro, L.; Siddiqui, S. An
SDN-Based Solution for Horizontal
Auto-Scaling and Load Balancing of
Transparent VNF Clusters. Sensors
2021, 21, 8283. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s21248283
Academic Editor: Francisco J.
González-Castaño
Received: 5 November 2021
Accepted: 8 December 2021
Published: 11 December 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Department of Network Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), 08860 Castelldefels, Spain
2 Bequant, 28003 Madrid, Spain; lpineiro@bequant.com
3 i2CAT Foundation, 08034 Barcelona, Spain; shuaib.siddiqui@i2cat.net
* Correspondence: alejandro.llorens@entel.upc.edu (A.L.-C.); irian.leyva@entel.upc.edu (I.L.-P .);
cristina@entel.upc.edu (C.C.-P .)
Abstract: This paper studies the problem of the dynamic scaling and load balancing of transparent
virtualized network functions (VNFs). It analyzes different particularities of this problem, such as
loop avoidance when performing scaling-out actions, and bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity. To address
this problem, a software-deﬁned networking (SDN)-based solution is implemented consisting of
two SDN controllers and two OpenFlow switches (OFSs). In this approach, the SDN controllers run
the solution logic (i.e., monitoring, scaling, and load-balancing modules). According to the SDN
controllers instructions, the OFSs are responsible for redirecting trafﬁc to and from the VNF clusters
(i.e., load-balancing strategy). Several experiments were conducted to validate the feasibility of this
proposed solution on a real testbed. Through connectivity tests, not only could end-to-end (E2E)
trafﬁc be successfully achieved through the VNF cluster, but the bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity strategy
was also found to perform well because it could simultaneously create ﬂow rules in both switches.
Moreover, the selected CPU-based load-balancing method guaranteed an average imbalance below
10% while ensuring that new incoming trafﬁc was redirected to the least loaded instance without
requiring packet modiﬁcation. Additionally, the designed monitoring function was able to detect
failures in the set of active members in near real-time and active new instances in less than a minute.
Likewise, the proposed auto-scaling module had a quick response to trafﬁc changes. Our solution
showed that the use of SDN controllers along with OFS provides great ﬂexibility to implement
different load-balancing, scaling, and monitoring strategies.
Keywords: auto-scaling; bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity; load balancing; NFV; SDN; transparent VNF
1. Introduction
Technologies such as network function virtualization (NFV) [1] and multi-access edge
computing (MEC) play a key role in the realization of 5G and beyond networks. NFV
decouples the network functions’ (NFs) logic from proprietary hardware and runs them
as software applications on general-purpose hardware [2]. This technology is expected to
not only reduce capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational expenditure (OPEX), but
also improve business agility by introducing new ways to design, orchestrate, deploy, and
manage network services (NSs). Additionally, MEC [ 3] brings computing, storage, and
networking resources closer to the users.
The placement of applications and NFs, such as user plane functions (UPFs), at the
network edge, provides signiﬁcant improvements in the end-to-end (E2E) response time
and bandwidth consumption, thus reducing the occurrence of bottlenecks in the network
backhaul [4]. However, the application of optimized placement strategies along with the
use of acceleration solutions is required to meet stringent 5G requirements for ultra-high
bandwidth and ultra-low latency (e.g., high throughput with 1–10 Gbps and less than 1 ms
response time in the data plane). A common approach to boost UPF performance is to
Sensors 2021, 21, 8283. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21248283 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

--- Page 2 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 2 of 23
integrate the UPF software networking elements with hardware-assisted network interface
controllers (NICs), such as ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [ 5]. An example
of this is the solution design presented in [ 5], where UPF performance achieved more
than 200 Gbps throughput with an average latency of 70 microseconds. This approach
nevertheless restricts the number of available candidates for the deployment of UPFs
due to their dependency on hardware capabilities (e.g., availability of FPGA-NICs). To
overcome this limitation, edge applications and NFs can make use of hardware capabilities
or virtualized accelerators available in remote locations (e.g., the cloud). However, the latter
may produce network overheads, which may affect bandwidth-bounded applications [6].
In this context, the combination of UPFs and virtualized trafﬁc accelerator capabilities at
the edge [7] could help to reduce bandwidth congestion, packet loss and latency.
Despite this potential solution, the deployment of virtual network functions (VNFs)
at the edge poses several challenges due to the fact that they are more sensitive to trafﬁc
variations and the limited resources of the MEC nodes [8]. When the allocated resources
are insufﬁcient to meet the requested demands, the user’s perceived quality of service
(QoS) degrades [9]. In contrast, if the assigned resources are over-provisioned, the service-
associated costs increase. To make efﬁcient use of MEC resources while providing the
high QoS that characterizes 5G networks and lowering the service provisioning cost, the
dynamic placement readjustment of VNFs along with the scaling of their assigned resources
(e.g., number of instances or capacity) based on their workloads or user’s trafﬁc demands
is imperative.
The virtualization of some traditional NFs such as trafﬁc accelerators or ﬁrewalls,
which can be deployed in a bump-in-the-wire (BITW) manner to avoid altering the com-
munication endpoints, would bring about extra difﬁculties. No modiﬁcation in the packet
headers is allowed when redirecting trafﬁc to guarantee the standard functionality of a
service (e.g., avoid service interruption) due to their transparent deployment. Scaling
out BITW VNFs may cause occasional loops in the network and subsequent problems
(e.g., slow and irregular connections and system failures). Additionally, bidirectional ﬂow
afﬁnity during the ﬂows’ lifetime may also be required.
Most of the literature addressing the problem of load balancing (LB) and auto-scaling
of VNF clusters [10,11] neglects the aforementioned use case scenario and its particularities.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to tackle the problem of dynamic auto-scaling
and load balancing of transparent VNFs while ensuring bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity. In this
regard, the key contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1. The design, implementation, and evaluation of a solution to make load balancing and
auto-scaling decisions to manage a cluster of transparent VNFs.
2. The proposed solution can not only distribute trafﬁc according to the selected LB
strategy but also guarantee bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity without packet modiﬁcation.
3. An auto-scaling strategy is presented to manage the size of a transparent VNF cluster.
4. The testbed of the proposed strategy in this research utilized real hardware unlike
most works on this topic, which use simulation tools (e.g., Mininet) to assess the
performances of their proposed strategies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces some works
related to the load balancing and auto-scaling of VNFs. Section 3 gives some background
on technologies, such as Open Source MANO and software-deﬁned networking (SDN). In
Section 4, a solution is proposed for trafﬁc distribution and the auto-scaling of a cluster of
transparent VNFs is presented, and Section 5 validates its effectiveness. Finally, Section 6
concludes our work and presents future work directions.
2. Related Work
This section provides a review of the literature related to load-balancing and auto-
scaling solutions in virtual environments.

--- Page 3 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 3 of 23
2.1. SDN-Based Load Balancers
Most SDN-based load-balancing studies focus their solutions on the designing of new
methods to decide on the most suitable destination for a given trafﬁc ﬂow. In this manner,
the authors of [ 12,13] propose SDN load-balancing algorithms to distribute requests to
servers dynamically. Their proposed strategies select the most suitable server based on
the real-time metrics of CPU utilization, memory utilization, and disk utilization. In [12],
the least loaded server is selected to handle trafﬁc requests, whereas in [ 13] a dynamic
weighted random selection algorithm (DWRS) is used. The DWRS gives higher weights to
underutilized services, so the server with the least load has a higher probability of being
chosen. Chen et al. [14] propose an SDN-based load-balancing solution to distribute trafﬁc
among a server cluster. Clients’ requests are sent to a virtual IP address and the trafﬁc is
then redirected to the selected server. Like traditional load balancers, Chen et al.’s solution
implies using a virtual IP and modiﬁcations of packets for routing the trafﬁc to the servers.
In [15], two OpenFlow-based mechanisms are presented for balancing multi-path TCP
(MPTCP) trafﬁc to a pool of servers. Though the proposed solutions guarantee the selection
of the same server for subﬂows belonging to the same MPTCP session, it is at the expense
of packet modiﬁcation. Similarly, the solution of Ma et al. [10] relies on OpenFlow switches
(OFSs) to reroute trafﬁc dynamically inside the network function chaining (NFC). The NFC
management uses a unique pair of VLAN tags for each chain. By using the open-source
PF_RING network socket [16], the proposed solution captures incoming packets and adds
the VLAN tags. At any time, the control element can update the number of used VLAN
tags for trafﬁc balancing.
The authors of [17] propose a load-balancing mechanism to distribute trafﬁc ﬂows
among switches by considering the equipment singularities. A local SDN controller guides
a data plane scalability mechanism to monitor the network trafﬁc and used resources on the
switches. This mechanism adjusts the number of active switches to meet network demands.
Moreover, the load balancer conﬁgures the required ﬂow rules on target switches and
relocates ﬂow rules to improve resource usage.
Abdelltif et al. [18] propose an SDN-based load-balancing service to optimize resource
utilization while reducing the user response time. The proposed mechanism comprises
three application modules (i.e., service classiﬁcation, dynamic load balancing, and monitor-
ing) that run on top of an SDN controller. The dynamic load balancing module distributes
the incoming trafﬁc to the servers according to the service type. The feasibility of the
proposed scheme is proved through experimental ﬁndings.
2.2. Load Balancing and Auto-Scaling
The authors of [19] provide insights into the network service descriptors (NSD) by
addressing ﬁelds related to scaling actions. Hinojosa et al. highlight the importance
of a proper NSD conﬁguration to ensure the appropriate scaling operations of VNFs.
Additionally, they offer an overview of the different available scaling procedures in NFV
and how to trigger them in an automated manner.
In [20], an auto-scaling approach for 5G data plane (DP) VNFs based on throughput
utilization is presented. This approach makes scale-out decisions based on the utilization
threshold, while scale-in events are run periodically to remove empty DP functions. In-
coming user requests are assigned to the DP with the highest throughput. Alawe et al. [11]
present an algorithm based on control theory for the horizontal scaling and load balancing
of 5G Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF). Additionally, scaling actions are
triggered according to the trafﬁc load.
The authors of [21] propose a threshold-based scaling mechanism that considers work-
load variations of the evolved packet core (EPC) to perform scaling actions. Its proposal
is formed by three modules: data collection, scaling decision, and scaling execution. To
evaluate their horizontal scaling procedure, the authors deploy a set of clusters for different
EPC elements. Each cluster contains a load balancer that uses a round-robin algorithm to
distribute the trafﬁc among the cluster’s instances.

--- Page 4 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 4 of 23
Dutta et al. [9] present a solution for the dynamic and automatic scaling of VNFs. Their
main aim is to ensure efﬁcient resource utilization while improving the quality of experience
(QoE) of the offered services. In their solution, the incoming trafﬁc is distributed to the pool
members through an LB with a round-robin conﬁguration. However, this approach implies
packet modiﬁcation since the LB works as a front-end service that reroutes incoming
requests. Ma et al. [10] propose a generic solution for the horizontal scaling of VNFs. Their
solution relies on two load balancers (a master and a salve) to distribute the trafﬁc in the
uplink and downlink directions. Moreover, they also address the ﬂow afﬁnity problem
when balancing trafﬁc among VNFs. To solve the problem, they use connection-aware
trafﬁc load balancers based on a hashing function to maintain afﬁnity between connections
and NFs. The authors of [22] demonstrate the importance of jointly considering instances
of load balancing and auto-scaling of VNF. They highlight the necessity of designing these
policies so that they are aware of one another to improve QoS and ensure a more efﬁcient
use of resources.
Lange et al. [23] proposes an architecture for VNF that exploits the beneﬁts of network
softwarization and machine learning-based approaches to orchestrate and manage the
life-cycle of VNFs. By monitoring the deployed VNF’s state and predicting its resources,
the proposed solution can perform scaling actions in advance while load-balancing actions
are leveraged to OpenStack load-balancing features. However, the auto-scaling of VNFs
and load-balancing performance are not covered in the obtained results. Thus, further
experiments are necessary in order to evaluate the overall feasibility of their proposal.
Despite the proposed solutions, none of the aforementioned works address the issue of
load balancing and auto-scaling transparent VNF clusters. Of these works, the most similar
to this paper is [10], as it presents a solution to address both issues by taking into account
bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity. However, its solution implies packet modiﬁcation, which is
not convenient for scenarios with BITW deployments. This type of deployment imposes
additional challenges in terms of scalability.
3. Background
This section presents some background on NFV management and orchestrators, SDN,
and OpenFlow switches. These elements are fundamental pillars for our solution imple-
mentation.
3.1. Open Source MANO
NFV is considered a key enabler technology for addressing the stringent requirements
of 5G and beyond networks [24–26]. Its agility and ﬂexibility to manage network resources
and services support carriers in deploying a variety of verticals with different requirements
while reducing costs. In this vein, the ETSI NFV Management and Orchestration (MANO)
framework [27] provides a standard architecture, used as a reference by vendors and open
source MANO projects for the monitoring and provisioning of VNFs [28]. The group of
open source MANO includes several projects such as Open Network Automation Platform
(ONAP) [29], Open Source MANO (OSM) [ 30], Open Baton [31], and Cloudify [32]. Of
these projects, ONAP and OSM are the most prominent ones in both academic and industry
sectors since big operators such as AT&T and Telefonica support their development [33].
This paper adopts OSM as the NFV orchestrator (NFVO) and virtual network function
manager (VNFM). It is responsible for the deployment of NSs and VNFs and monitoring
the life-cycle management of VNFs. The selection of OSM was based on its maturity,
performance, and comprehensive utilization [33]. Another criterion for this selection was
its modular architecture formed by several elements, including Resource Orchestrator (RO),
Lifecycle Management (LCM), Policy Manager (POL), and Monitoring (MON). Thus, our
implementation could obtain information related to NSs and their associated metrics by
directly communicating with the modules in charge of managing this information (i.e., RO
and MON modules).

--- Page 5 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 5 of 23
3.2. Software-Deﬁned Networking
Along with the NFV paradigm, SDN is recognized as a crucial pillar in the devel-
opment of 5G and beyond networks to fulﬁll their network requirements [ 24–26]. The
SDN architecture is composed of three layers: application, control, and data [ 34]. The
control plane is formed by the controller, which manages all the devices (e.g., routers and
switches) in the data plane in a uniﬁed manner. Additionally, network applications, used
by the controller, are implemented and executed in the application layer. One of SDN’s
main features is the control and user plane separation (CUPS). The CUPS guarantees that
the resources of each plane can be scaled independently. It also allows the placement of
the user plane functions closer to users, thereby reducing network response times and
bandwidth consumption. Moreover, the separation of these two planes allows the direct
programmability of network policies, thus ensuring simplicity and versatility in network-
ing conﬁgurations [34]. Additionally, SDN offers new methods to ﬂexibly instantiate NFs
and services while reducing expenses and boosting performance. For instance, it allows
the support for new protocols and the ability to adapt network resources and topology to
changes in the conﬁguration and placement of NFs and services [35,36].
The SDN concept is applied in a wide variety of solutions in which the controller is a
key element in the control operations. In this regard, the architectural deployment of the
controllers is crucial to guarantee that the performance of the overall network is adequate.
Speciﬁcally, from an architectural point of view, SDN controllers can be classiﬁed into two
groups: centralized and distributed. The centralized architecture is formed by a unique
controller for the sake of simplicity. However, this design represents a bottleneck in the
network and has scalability limitations when the network trafﬁc increases. By contrast,
a distributed architecture improves network scalability, ﬂexibility, and reliability. For
instance, this architecture avoids having a single point of failure since when one of its
distributed controllers fails, another(s) can assume its functions and devices. Therefore,
this design is more resilient to different kinds of disruptions. Furthermore, with the
programmability of SDN, this process can be automated and conﬁgured according to the
design and requirements of the network. Thus, the distributed architecture is capable of
responding and adapting to new requirements and conditions.
3.3. OpenFlow Switches
An OFS consists of one or more ﬂow tables and a group table, which perform packet
lookup and forwarding, and one or more OpenFlow channels to communicate with an ex-
ternal controller. The switch communicates with the controller, and the controller manages
the switch via the OpenFlow protocol [37]. The controller can add, update, and delete ﬂow
entries from the switch ﬂow tables through the OF protocol. A ﬂow entry is formed by sev-
eral ﬁelds such as match, counters, actions, and priority. Speciﬁcally, the match ﬁeld allows
the creation of ﬂow entries according to various match criteria. For instance, it may be
conﬁgured to match various packet header ﬁelds (e.g., source/destination IP/MAC/ports,
protocol, VLAN ID), packet ingress port, or metadata value.
When a ﬂow arrives at an OFS it veriﬁes, in its ﬂow tables, if there is already a deﬁned
rule that matches the incoming ﬂow. If such a rule exists, then the speciﬁed actions are
executed. A wide variety of instructions can be applied to ﬂow entries, such as packet
forwarding (e.g., forward packet to a port) and packet modiﬁcation. In the case of several
rules matching the ﬂow description, the rule with the highest priority order is applied. In
contrast, if no match is found in any ﬂow tables, the switch can be conﬁgured to send the
packet to its assigned controller or drop it.
3.4. Flow Afﬁnity
Utilizing ﬂow afﬁnity implies that packets belonging to the same ﬂow will undergo
similar treatments along their paths (e.g., processed by the same set of network func-
tions) [38,39]. In this study, we deﬁne bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity as the property of process-
ing packets associated with a speciﬁc ﬂow by the same network function, in both directions

--- Page 6 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 6 of 23
of their data path (i.e., uplink and downlink). Trafﬁc ﬂows are identiﬁed by ﬁve parameters
from the packet headers: source IP , destination IP , protocol, source port, and destination
port. These parameters form a ﬁve-tuple, and by combining them, different hashing
methods can be deﬁned. The three most popular combinations are: source-destination
IP , source-destination IP + protocol, and source-destination IP + source-destination port +
protocol.
4. Solution Proposal
In this section, after a brief overview of the problem of interest, the proposed solution
for the management (i.e., balancing and horizontal auto-scaling) of a cluster of transparent
VNFs is presented.
4.1. Problem Description
Network operators are virtualizing their physical network functions to align with new
services requirements imposed by 5G networks and beyond. These NFs can be grouped
into different categories according to their characteristics (i.e., by network functionalities
and connectivity, network security, and network performance). Many of the NFs associated
with network performance (e.g., trafﬁc shaping, rate limiting, and trafﬁc accelerators) are
usually transparently placed between the access and internet network providers. In other
words, they do not have a forwarding IP since they are placed as BITW functions and,
thus, work in layer 2 of the OSI model. The virtualization of NFs offers ﬂexibility for the
management of network resources since NFs can be scaled as their processed trafﬁc changes.
Existing MANO frameworks (e.g., OSM) offer some scaling policies to automatically adjust
VNF capacity to trafﬁc demands. However, the scale-out policy of MANO frameworks is
characterized by the placement of new deployed functions in the same subnetwork as the
original ones. Moreover, they do not allow for the modiﬁcation of previously launched
NSs, for instance, the adding of new VNF instances or subnetworks. These limitations
cause severe problems in the network when scaling transparent functions since network
loops may appear.
Load balancers are crucial to avoid overload and guarantee efﬁcient trafﬁc distribution
to the pool members when more than one instance of a given type is deployed and forms a
cluster. Additionally, load balancers enhance the availability and reliability of the network
service by redirecting incoming requests to only healthy VNFs. Well-known MANO
frameworks, such as OSM and ONAP , lack native load-balancing services. Thereby, they
rely on speciﬁc virtual functions (e.g., HAProxy [40]) that need to be deployed along with
the pool members to provide this feature. However, this solution requires the assignment
of a virtual IP to the load balancer to redirect all the incoming trafﬁc to it. The latter is
recommended when the pool entities are a ﬁnal service or the destination of the incoming
trafﬁc. Otherwise, an extra function may need to be inserted in the ﬂow path to modify the
header packets to reach their ﬁnal destination. A similar shortcoming has been found in
virtual infrastructure management (VIM) technologies, such as OpenStack. Though these
technologies provide load-balancing services (i.e., Octavia which is based on a neutron
load-balancing mechanism (load balance as a service, LBaaS)), they are also aimed at
ﬁnal services.
Moreover, some VNF types, such as ﬁrewalls and intrusion detection systems, require
that the same instance process all the fragments of a given ﬂow during the ﬂow lifetime.
Other VNF types (e.g., TCP trafﬁc accelerators) may need to ensure bidirectional ﬂow
afﬁnity to work properly.
Under these circumstances, designing a mechanism for the efﬁcient management
of transparent VNF clusters is critical. The envisioned solution must be able to dynam-
ically scale cluster resources, balance the ﬂow trafﬁc between transparent VNFs, ensure
bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity, and avoid packet modiﬁcations and extra processing.

--- Page 7 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 7 of 23
4.2. Design Architecture and Implementation
Our proposed solution for the management of transparent clusters is formed by
two redirector VNFs, one at each side of the cluster. The reason for placing redirector
functions on both sides of the cluster (uplink and downlink directions) is to ensure the
bidirectional ﬂow afﬁnity requirement (see Section 4.2.3). Each VNF redirector consists
of an OFS and an SDN controller mainly responsible for load-balancing aspects. The
SDN controllers work in an active-standby conﬁguration. The active controller replicates
the network information to the standby one by using the data distribution service (DDS)
method described in [ 41]. Since the DDS method is based on the publish/subscribe
paradigm, the active controller will publish the discovered nodes and conﬁgured ﬂows
through a data stream also known as a topic. Speciﬁcally, the used topic is composed of
seven ﬁelds: Identiﬁer, NodeId, Port, SourceNode, SourceNodePort, DestinationNode, and
DestinationNodePort. Using the identiﬁer ﬁeld, the active controller announces whether
it will send a node or a ﬂow. In the case of the standby controller, it will be subscribed to
the used topic, thus receiving the network information. This approach avoids the network
discovery phase of the standby controller in the case of a failure in the active controller,
thus reducing the service downtime and improving the fault tolerance of the system. The
master controller is placed facing the access network to reduce response time, since most
trafﬁc requests originate in the uplink direction. The use of two SDN controllers is not
strictly necessary, but it is highly recommended to improve the robustness of the solution.
Figure 1 provides a general overview of the proposed design as well as the interconnection
mode among the solution elements.
.
.
.
VNF
 
Pool
Access 
Network
Internet
 
Network
Synchronization channel
...
VNF n
VNF 
2
VNF 
1
SDN 
Controller
(
Active
)
SDN 
Controller
(
Standby
)
OF Protocol 
(
active channel
)
OF Protocol 
(
standby channel
)
OF 
Switch
OF 
Switch
Redirector 
1
Redirector 
2
Figure 1. A high-level view of the proposed solution.
The envisioned VNF redirector application has a modular design, where each module
performs a speciﬁc function (i.e., monitoring, auto-scaling, and load balancing). The logic
of these functions runs on top of the SDN controllers, as shown in Figure 2. The monitoring
module is in charge of checking the status of VNF instances as well as periodically collecting
metrics. This information is used as input by the load balancing and auto-scaling blocks
to perform their logic. The auto-scaling module is in charge of managing the cluster size.
Speciﬁcally, it triggers scale-in and scale-out actions based on the status and load of the pool
members. Furthermore, the load-balancing module is the core of the redirector application.
It is responsible for selecting the VNF instance to which a trafﬁc request will be assigned
for its processing. The selection of a VNF instance depends on the speciﬁed load-balancing
strategy (e.g., least loaded CPU) and the status and capacity of the cluster’s members. Each

--- Page 8 ---

Sensors 2021, 21, 8283 8 of 23
instance belonging to the VNF cluster is associated with a unique port in the OF switches.
To simplify the solution complexity, a mirror conﬁguration, in which the same port in both
switches is selected, is recommended.
NFVI
VNFs
VNFM
NFVO
VIM
SDN 
Controller
Redirector
-
VNF
1
OFS
SDN 
Controller
Redirector
-
VNF
2
OFS
X
-
VNF 
Pool
LB
Auto
-
scale
Monitor
Figure 2. An overview of the solution components and its communication with the NFV entities.
To improve the VNF redirector performance and allow faster packet processing in the
load-balancing module, our design exploits the parallel processing capacity of multi-cores
along with a multi-threaded technique, thus avoiding delay in its procedure due to the
performance of other modules. The following subsections provide more insights into the
operation mode of the VNF redirector’s modules.
4.2.1. Monitoring Module
Transparent VNFs are not compatible with well-known health monitor methods,
such as PING, TLS-HELLO, UDP-CONNECT, and TCP-CONNECT, since they all require
that their queries be directed to an IP address. A workaround could be the use of the
management network to send the messages associated with one of these health methods.
However, this implies additional load in the VNF cluster. To resolve this shortcoming,
our solution uses information already available to other components (i.e., VNFM). The
VNFM monitors the health status and performance (e.g., CPU and memory utilization)
of VNF instances and network services to manage their life cycles. In the OSM MANO,
its monitoring module has a feature (mon-collector) to collect the speciﬁed metrics in the
VNF descriptors. The mon-collector polls the VIM, where the VNFs are deployed, to gather
the desired metrics and stores them in its Prometheus time-series database (TSDB). To
make this information available to the redirector application, our solution implements
the monitoring module. This module communicates with the Prometheus TSDB and
gathers VNF status and metrics. In this manner, the LB can be aware of the healthy and
unhealthy instances and their available resources. This approach solves the limitation
mentioned above and avoids overloading the cluster with frequent health polling through
the management network.